let's start at the deep end the whole
world
all of a sudden is anti-china and the
whole world is not disclosing to you
what the reasons for that might be do
you really think
that people like donald trump and angela
merkel
all of a sudden hate china because of
the treatment of muslims in xinjiang
that just doesn't seem terribly probable
do you really think
that it's because people like donald
trump and angela merkel
are horrified by the change in
banking conditions in hong kong
is this is this really what has brought
about this sudden change in attitude
among major western powers notably the
united states and its allies
towards china why is it that the west
has suddenly shifted
from an overall tone of economic
cooperation and development and
appeasement
towards china towards this hard line of
confrontation
well the first thing to note is that it
is not
so sudden a change this was the
transformation
in u.s policy and you might say western
american pro-american policy this was
the change in u.s foreign policy
that obama attempted and
failed to bring about with his so-called
pivot to asia
now probably the last person on earth to
admit to you
that donald trump's policy is imitating
or following in the footsteps of the
earlier policy of obama
would be donald trump himself i'm sure
he does not see it that way i'm sure he
sees his own policy towards china
something he has innovated however if
you were to look at the
larger community of foreign policy
professionals
uh pentagon employees there will be many
people
who more or less continuously worked
under the obama administration and were
part of obama's so-called pivot to asia
and then drifted into the trump era
with that awareness with that agenda in
mind one way or another
those people also would have heard years
and years
of anti-china rhetoric from donald trump
including very strong anti-china
rhetoric for him from him
in his earlier attempts to run for
president united states some of you
may have forgotten this or if you're not
american you might not have followed
those earlier
elections but this is not the first time
donald trump announced his candidacy
for president states in all of the
earlier instances he
canceled at some very early stage of the
primaries but nevertheless he gave
interviews
and he became famous for constantly
harping on
constantly repeating anti-china rhetoric
so
there would have been an expectation
amongst the people who were continuously
under obama and then under trump that
trump might continue
obama's pivot to asia you know this
so-called pivot
that basically meant obama didn't want
to deal with iraq anymore and didn't
want to deal with afghanistan
he wanted to deal with china japan korea
with that part of east asia
a pivot to the east you might say and
obama failed to do that for various
reasons
probably most importantly being that he
just failed to extricate himself
from the quagmire in iraq if anything
obama ended up getting deeper and deeper
into that quagmire precisely because of
the then
unexpected meteoric rise of isis
a threat that didn't last so long but at
the time it wasn't clear
at all how long or how menacing the
threat from isis might
really be okay so this is one thing it
is possible that
the united states and its allies were
for many years
getting their ducks in a row were
getting organized
to switch to a hard anti-china policy
and thus at this moment they have a
plausible
excuse for this new anti-china policy in
attaching it to their outrage over the
treatment of
muslims in xinjiang attaching it to
their outrage over
um i don't know constitutional changes
in hong kong shall we say uh and
now all of a sudden they can pretend to
be outraged
by the border conflict between india and
china
in ladakh there are many many
misconceptions
about this border conflict most of them
have arisen i believe
spontaneously not as the result of any
kind of
cia orchestrated misinformation campaign
campaign or anything of that sort
oh and in this video i'm not going to
discuss it too much but there's also the
the ongoing south china sea controversy
this is not being discussed so much
right now but uh
in general the philippines had a period
of many years of trying to
cooperate with china try to play nice
with china trying to work with china
instead of against china
and they have finally lost patience with
that
so in general um
the cautious optimism of recent years
that the conflict between china and
basically all of the countries of
southeast asia over the south china sea
territorialization and island dispute
and so on and so forth
the cautious optimism that would resolve
itself without any further conflict is
now
dead and gone so increasingly countries
including the philippines indonesia
malaysia and australia
are hardening into an anti-china stance
we actually we don't know yet
really what japan's position will and
this will be it is also true
that going back to that earlier obama
period of the pivot to asia so for
you know a fair number of years now
there has been an
overt strategic alliance between
australia and india and it has been
completely overt that this alliance was
anti-china the extent to which japan
would be the third member in that
alliance has been
debated and you might well say that
alliance hasn't accomplished anything
great so far
but there was a palpable example in
india australia and japan all trying to
contest
the control of the coast of myanmar
including
ports and mirrors there's naval policy
across a huge span of the ocean
and showing that they were not
comfortable with china having too much
real estate too much control over that
coastline
so these are kind of warm-ups for a
strategy on a grand
scale of uniting again at a minimum
australia and india against china and
what role japan
the philippines even vietnam might play
in joining in this alliance
remains to be seen just in the last week
australia announced a
40 increase in its military budget
uh and that's over a 10-year period so
decade to decade comparison
enormous increase in the military budget
and in plain english it is
for anti-china reasons they want to have
a
credible deterrent if they have to deal
with war with china
so that's going to be partly naval
preparedness because
australia it doesn't have a land border
with china it's also going to mean
long-range missiles so yeah conflict is
heating up
what does this have to do with the
border between india and china and
ladakh
i've already shown my cards here i think
it's quite
insincere attaching this sudden
policy shift in the part of the united
states australia numerous other players
the anti-china shift in the overall
international diplomatic climate should
always say i do not think it is the
result
of the border conflict in ladakh
um however that is a convenient way to
illustrate to the general public
why these various anti-china powers now
want to
[Music]
take the position they are taking
against china it gives them an
opportunity to
depict china as a rapacious
expansionist imperialist power which it
is not
so china is many things
there are many bad things i can say
about china it is a communist
dictatorship
it's a country that lacks democracy it's
country the last trade of speech
if you think china is trying to conquer
india if you think china is interested
in any way
in expanding its territory into india
you must be joking
china does not want to conquer india
china does not want to conquer myanmar
it doesn't want to conquer laos there is
absolutely
no interest from the current regime in
expanding china's borders
in any direction whatsoever not even
in reconquering areas that historically
were
part of china in the past but are not
currently under chinese control so they
do not even have an eurodentist
policy which is a big contrast to major
empires around the world
and indeed this is actually one of the
defining elements of chinese foreign
policy
now there is a disputed territory
on the border between india and china
there is absolutely no evidence
whatsoever
that china aggressively planned
to invade the disputed territory there
is no evidence that there was any
organization that there was any
forethought whatsoever
there was any intention behind this
clash
that erupted on the border and there is
especially this important
there's no evidence that the chinese won
the body count on the indian side was
published first
and many people just imagined that the
number of dead and injured
soldiers on the indian side was absolute
and the number of dead and injured
soldiers on the chinese side
was zero or close to zero and then later
we found out that's not true at all
china has not confirmed their body count
but um there were some secret
communications intercepted
basically of people making like radio
calls
calling for ambulances and dealing with
the casualties and it turns out that far
more people died and were injured on the
chinese side
than on the indian side now that doesn't
mean that either side had
planned an invasion or that there was
any planning for this situation
whatsoever most accounts seem to say
that this was something like
two groups of teenagers getting into a
rumble that this is something that
happened in an unplanned
messy way uh where neither government at
the elite level
like at the level of presidents and
prime ministers nobody ordered this
nobody had a grand strategy nobody had
an objective so that's
very important to keep in mind there's
also a sort of
spontaneous narrative that's emerged
from the public
perceiving this i was saying spontaneous
because i don't think anyone
orchestrated this i don't think this is
an intentionally deceptive narrative
that's been
presented to the public or by the public
people have presumed that china
is in a position of unchallenged power
and this is not true uh
let's very briefly talk about the
advantages each side has here
india has the greatest advantage of all
have you ever heard that old saying
possession is half the law india
possesses this territory india inhabits
this territory if you just zoom in on
google maps you're going to see
that in the indian controlled portion of
the disputed territory
there are towns and villages and
farms and shops and roads and
electricity
and bank machines atms
where there are bank machines there is
civilization there is normal life if you
go to
youtube and you put in the names of
these small towns in the disputed
territory
you will see tourists tourists going up
to hike in the mountains and ride their
bicycles
it doesn't look like a war zone it
doesn't look like a disputed
uh territory india has achieved
normal life coated in existence in this
disputed or occupied territory whatever
you want to say
that is a huge fundamental victory and i
don't know to what extent that was an
intentional
strategy that the indian government
pursued that they wanted to cement their
position there
by making sure they built those roads
and developed those villages
and irrigated the land to have
agriculture i don't know
or maybe that's just the way it worked
out maybe just ecologically
the grass grew greener on that side of
the hill more rainfall better soil or
something
ultimately roads don't grow because the
soil is good the government had to build
those roads and the other infrastructure
electricity and internet connections and
getting bank machines and running there
but
india has successfully cultivated the
land
in every sense of the word on their side
of the line of control
on the chinese side of the line of
control you will find
absolutely nothing of the kind you will
find dust
and a rock it is an inhospitable
wasteland to what extent that's the
result of
climate alone i can't say i'm not a
geologist and i'm not a meteorologist
but to some extent that is either the
result of policy on china's side
or a failure of policy a lack of policy
that maybe china didn't make this effort
to build roads and networks and start
inhabiting and peopling and settling the
land there right
and again if you just zoom in on google
maps you can see this
now also if you search youtube
you're not going to find happy tourists
going on hikes there
the way the chinese treat that area is
that it's a very dicey
military occupied area where nobody is
allowed to freely walk around or do
anything they have military patrols they
have these soldiers staying in tents
at a series of checkpoints so that's
that's the way the chinese have played
the game
and their side of the disputed territory
so who is winning
if you just take some time to explore
zooming in and zooming out on google
maps you can search for things like bank
machines those signs of normal life
there is a profound sense in which india
is winning you could say india has
already won
now with that even said
when you talk about what's likely to
happen next india has no reason to
change the status quo
because from their perspective in this
sense
they've already won they've already
occupied and populated the land that
they want to have
and that's it they don't need to fight
for anything more
from the chinese side the advantage of
perpetuating the status quo and this is
most likely why they haven't invaded if
they haven't
tried to sell this to negotiations or
they haven't offered a purchase or sale
they haven't offered an adjustment to
the border resolution the border
from the chinese side it was
plausible that one day sooner or later
there would be a free trade agreement
between india and china
or maybe even an agreement about train
train lines or cooperation there'd be
some treaty some kind of negotiation
with governments
where the chinese could add on the
proviso oh yeah
and we want you to give us back this
disputed territory we want you to agree
that the border is where
china says it is and this will become
permanently transgender
now why is that so plausible because
china has done that with so many other
countries
all around the world china gives
development aid
to poorer countries and then they tack
on certain
provisos requirements conditions that
they ask for in return
this is not unique to the government of
china if you get interested in
development economics
of course even countries like canada and
countries like england
play this sort of game in the case of
england or canada they're not asking for
territory in return
but yes concessions of various kinds
treaties of various kinds
in return for economic development
cooperation and so on and so forth
so it is quite likely the chinese side
thought that if they just sat back
and did nothing sooner or later there
would be a large
deal made with india for some other
reason
under some other heading whether it was
connecting a speed train
or what have you and at that point it
could be settled and china would regain
the disputed territories without firing
a shot let's also say
from the perspective of india it's quite
likely that wouldn't be a bad deal
if there's some multi-billion dollar
agreement that's really going to benefit
india in a lot of ways and they say well
we're going to lose maybe five or six
villages
in this remote area that not much of
anyone cares about and we'll finally
have
peace with china we'll have a border
checkpoint that makes sense
and we can write it into this chapter of
history it's quite likely india
under the right circumstances would be
happy with that also there is another
interpretation of this
um another interpretation that's
possible
and this i'll give you another example
of this happening in real world
political science
it is possible that china intentionally
wanted to keep this border
unresolved so that they had caused this
bellai
so that they had a pretext to go to war
so that a pretext to start a conflict
between india and china
at any time one of the examples i've
studied most
in modern history of this is actually
the border between
thailand and laos despite the
involvement of the united nations
despite the involvement of independent
observers and
sending in geologists
and cartographers and satellite
data experts there have been so many
internationally adjudicated efforts to
settle the question of where exactly
the border is between thailand and laos
the thai military and the thai
government will
absolutely never agree on
where a certain portion of the border is
and it's in an area
that's almost completely uninhabited
there's a little length
of the border in the middle of the
mountains where thailand refuses to sign
anything
and that is so that they can again
because they've done it in the past
so they can again start a war with laos
they can again
invade or even conquer laos they have
caused a spell out that there is this
unresolved border on the map
so every map will have a little dotted
line area or a special pink
line where that's the unrecognized
portion of the border again in an area
that
nobody cares about except it has this
enduring
status it's like having a box of matches
in the drawer of your kitchen just in
case you want to start a fire sometime
um the average person doesn't know about
and doesn't care about
this disputed border however still in
thailand the average person has memories
of the war
last were 1987 88 89
in that period thailand invaded laos
and the united nations found thailand at
fault for that that morally and
ethically thailand was at fault
and thailand had to pay reparations they
had to pay a penalty allows
to apologize afterwards because it was a
one-sided illegal
act of aggression under international
law
so that would be a much more grim
interpretation
of the ladakh border dispute between
india and china
the fact that the chinese government
can lie to you doesn't mean that they
are lying to you and
government of china took its time before
making
official statements about what happened
and why it matters
on the china india border but now that
those official statements are out
they sound a lot like the truth to me
and the most fundamental thing they're
saying is
this wasn't a planned invasion china has
no
plans and no intentions to conquer india
china has no plans to expand its
territory
this was a kerfuffle in plain english
this was an unfortunate confusion
that resulted in a bunch of people
beating each other with sticks
again no no shots were fired no guns
were used this was a
conflict that started apparently because
of confusion over the placement of a
tent along a certain patrol line where
the chinese
do regularly come up and check on one of
the roads that's on the the indian side
of the line of control
so what is the ultimate moral of the
story here
well for one thing in politics when
problems don't get solved very often it
is because
one side or the other does not want
a solution when wars go on
for decades and decades it's you know
they're never resolved
on paper very often it's because
one side or the other feels that they
have already won
and they only stand to lose if there's
either an outright conflict
or an outright treaty negotiation
another example of this
still disputed to this day is the border
between
russia and japan
have you heard of that one did you even
know that russia has
a border with japan look up sakalin
island
it may well by the way both on paper and
in practice
russia and japan remain at war
to this day they never had a peace
treaty
at the end of world war ii they have
never sorted out where their border is
and every month week after week
they have fighter jets back and forth
dog fighting
over that border i'm not joking in any
given year you can look up the statistic
for how many times it happened if it
happened 300 times in a year or 150
times a year
but they have more or less constant dog
fighting over that disputed border i'm
assuming the russians do it
because they think their pilots need the
training you know nobody gets killed or
maybe i'm lying maybe once in a long
while there's an accident and one of
these plans goes down or something
because
that's a dangerous game right but there
is a there
so there is a war zone that seemingly
nobody cares about
why russia doesn't think it's in their
interest
to resolve it peacefully or violently
japan at least currently they have no
army
they have no ability to make war they
have no negotiating position
so it's not in their interest to resolve
it so it remains unresolved the war and
the border dispute goes on
forever and ever and that's basically
what we're talking about with the border
between
china and india ladakh
china has by the way resolved its
borders with many other countries
including myanmar they sat down with the
government myanmar they said okay this
is where the border is
um it's kind of inconvenient in a few
places because of the mountains and the
rivers
let's agree to trade some land we'll
give you a little bit of land here you
give us a little bit of land there
no problem there have actually been many
other countries and many other border
disputes where china was
completely reasonable everything got
sorted out no problem
and it's significant that so far ladakh
is not one of them and by the way as
mentioned the south china sea the
conflict with the philippines
also not one of them um
and then on a grand scale we have the
question
of this shift in american policy
and australian policy and in the america
allied world uh i would guess
including england we'll see how far
england is willing to go now in
in adopting an anti-china policy as
opposed to embracing a tree with china
there has been this shift that started
under obama
not under trump of shifting america
towards a
harder and harder anti-china policy and
the truth is
as in 2020 nobody
knows why nobody knows what the us
government
is trying to win nobody knows what the
us government is afraid that they can
lose i could speculate i could name all
kinds of controversies that have come up
in the press
we could talk through hypotheticals but
i'll tell you one thing
whatever the reason is for this big
fundamental shift in american foreign
policy
geostrategic roles and what have you
it has absolutely nothing to do with
india's border dispute with china